---
order: 2
title:  Lessons in freedom and fighting for a better future
categories: [article, photography]
link: http://undocumented.dailybruin.com/chapter3/a-fighting-chance/
photo:
    filename: bob_emiko.jpg
    caption: (Angie Wang / Daily Bruin)
    large: true
---

In 2013, Laura Emiko Soltis walked 200 miles in solidarity with farmworkers in South Florida, making their physical struggle as migrant laborers her own.

“Marching with people makes me feel most alive,” she said, thinking back.

Soltis’ lifelong career as an activist has taken her from storming hallways in front of the Emory University president’s office, to living with farmworkers in the fields of South Florida, to her current post as the director of Freedom University, an organization dedicated to educating undocumented students.

She speaks with an authority about activism that belies her slender frame and youthful face, a quiet passion pervading her words. What ultimately fuels her fight though is not fury, but hope.

“You can be angry, and you should be,” she said. “But you have to be able to imagine the alternative, and that’s what you have to work toward.”

As the director of Freedom University, Soltis creates a space for action, planning classes that allow students to use their own experiences as a source of knowledge and empowerment rather than simply teaching state-mandated curricula.

“I want to show them there are many different kinds of knowledge,” Soltis said. “They can shape the world around them, even if it’s bleak and oppressive.”

Soltis’ own life has been a case study in the struggle to take a stand and incite positive change.

“Activism isn’t a spectacle,” she said. “It really sucks if you do it right.”

She learned that lesson as a graduate student, when she – along with six other students – was arrested during a standoff at Emory University for protesting unfair wages for subcontracted cafeteria workers.

That night, Soltis spent 16 hours in DeKalb County Jail, mostly with women of color who were arrested for minor offenses like driving without a license.

“It was a microcosm of everything wrong,” she said.

For her doctoral dissertation, she researched the migrant labor movement in South Florida, living among the farmworkers and getting to know them and their families.

Soltis became involved in the undocumented student movement after those experiences sparked within her a deep commitment to educating and guiding immigrant youth.

“Then it wasn’t about farmworkers 10 hours away, it was about undocumented youth and families in our communities,” Soltis said.

Freedom University was her chance to take what she learned throughout her education as an activist and invest it into her work with students who, like her, are fighting for a better future.

”I love teaching, but using that knowledge to affect the world around you is the most powerful part of Freedom University,” she said. “I want them to practice the world they want, to show the world that what they want is possible.”